Installation of Isearch-sru requires a number of steps.

1.  Configure Apache

If you are going to use Apache as the web server interface to handle
the SRU requests, it is necessary to configure it so that it can
translate the incoming requests appropriately.  The index (target)
name looks, to the wweb server, like a CGI script.  We use mod_rewrite
to pull off the translation successfully.  To do this, include the
following code either in httpd.conf, or in a separate file
(mod_rewrite.conf works nicely) and include that into httpd.conf.  The
configuration will look something like this:

RewriteEngine on
RewriteLog /var/log/apache2/rewrite_log
RewriteLogLevel 4
RewriteRule ^/sru/fgdc([^?]*)$ /srv/www/sru-bin/isearch-sru.cgi?x-db=fgdc&%{QUERY_STRING} [L]


Note that the RewriteRule will require editing - replace "fgdc" with
the name of your index.  You can include as many of these are you have
indexes, one line for each index.  To have apache load the separate
config file when it starts up, your http.conf file should include a
line like:

Include /etc/apache2/mod_rewrite.conf

or whatever the correct path and name for your file might be.  After
you make these changes, you will have to restart Apache.

2.  Create Apache aliases (if desired)

In order to keep things straight, I use an Alias declaration in my
Apache config file to allow me to keep the Isearch-sru files separate:


Alias /sru/ /srv/www/sru-bin/
<Directory "/srv/www/sru-bin">
 AllowOverride None
 Options +ExecCGI -Includes
 Order allow,deny
 Allow from all
</Directory>

This ensures that the URLs in the RewriteRule make sense.  If you opt
not to use an alias, just install the files (see step #3) in cgi-bin.

3.  Install files in sru-bin

Copy the following files to the sru-bin directory:

isearch-sru.cgi
isru.dtd
isru.xsl
Isearch-db.sru
Isearch-sru.ini
sru_dc.map
sru_geo.map
sru_gils.map
sru_rec.map

4.  Customizing Isearch-sru

The file Isearch-sru.ini contains some site-specific strings that can
be customized - you will want to modify the parameters DebugLevel,
Server, Port, Title and Description according to your site's
configuration.  Nothing else in the file needs to be changed unless
you want to experiment.

The file Isearch-db.sru contains the index-specific information.  Note
that the external name (the one the server responds to) is given in
brackets to define a section.  It is not necessary to use the same
name as the index created by the Iindex2 program.  You can specify the
base name of the index with the IndexName parameter.  You will want to
modify the parameters Path (so the indexes can be located for
searching), Title and Description (so that your site responds
appropriately to Explain requests).  Do this for each index you are
providing access to.

The files isru.dtd and isru.xsl are used by the discovery step.  Note
that the SRU/SRW protocol does not include a mechanism for discovering
what indexes are hosted at the site.  Isearch-cgi will provide a list
of the indexes if no parameters are sent, with links to the Explain
request.

The map files provide the mappings between the various element sets
defined for SRU/SRW and the specific field names in the indexes.  If
you are indexing FGDC-style XML metadata, these do not need to be
changed.
